The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, except as a runner; in
which exercise, however, he was almost unequalled, and showed great
powers of endurance. None of his old schoolfellows have been surprised
to hear of his success as the head of the Intelligence Department of
an army, or of his marvellous marches and appearances in impossible
places as Captain of Irregular Horse. Such performances only carry us
back to first calling over, when we used to see him come in splashed
and hot, and to hear his cheery "Old fellow! I've been to Brinklow
since dinner." But, as a boy, he was not remarkable for physical
strength or courage, and none of us would have foretold that he would
become one of the most daring and successful swordsmen in the Indian
army. We only mention the fact, because it is of great importance that
the truth in this matter, which the lives of Hodson and others have
established, should be as widely acknowledged as possible. A man born
without any natural defect can, in this as in other respects, make his
own character; no man need be a coward who _will_ not be one; and a
high purpose steadfastly kept in view will, in the end, help a man to
the doing of nobler deeds of daring than any amount of natural
combativeness.

From Rugby he went to Trinity, Cambridge, where he took his degree in
1844; but, fortunately for his country, and (let us own it, hard as it
is as yet to do so) for himself also, a constitutional tendency to
headache led him to choose the army rather than a learned profession.
After a short service in the Guernsey militia, which he entered to
escape superannuation, he got a cadetship, and embarked for India. Sir
William Napier, then Governor of Guernsey, gave him a letter to his
brother, Sir Charles, and himself wrote of him, "I think he will be an
acquisition to any service. His education, his ability, his zeal to
make himself acquainted with military matters, gave me the greatest
satisfaction during his service with the militia." His brother's
letter never was presented to Sir Charles Napier, as we infer from the
passage at p. 156, where it is mentioned again, "I didn't show him his
brother's letter," writes Hodson in 1850, "that he might judge for
himself first, and know me 'per se,' or rather 'per me.' I will,
however, if ever I see him again." He never saw Sir Charles again; but
what a glimpse of the man's character we get from these few lines.

On the 13th of September, 1845, Hodson landed in India, and went up
country at once to Agra. Here he found the Hon. James Thomason,
Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Provinces, a family friend and
connection, with whom he stayed till November 2d, when he was
appointed to do duty with the 2d Grenadiers, and began his military
career as part of the escort of the Governor-General, who was on his
way to the Punjab. In that quarter a black cloud had gathered, which
it was high time should be looked after.

Hodson, however, marches on, all unconscious, and his first letters
give no hint of coming battle, but contain a charmingly graphic
description of the life of an Indian army on march. Here, too, in the
very outset, we find that rare virtue of making the best of everything
peeping out, which so strongly characterized him.

     "It is a sudden change of temperature, truly,--from near
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India, by 
W. S. R. Hodson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India
       Being Extracts from the Letters of the Late Major W. S. R. Hodson, B. A.

Author: W. S. R. Hodson

Editor: George H. Hodson

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved.  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA.




                       If a soldier,
     Chase brave employments with a naked sword
     Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
     If they dare try, a glorious life or grave.




     TWELVE YEARS
     OF A
     SOLDIER'S LIFE IN INDIA:

     BEING EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS
     OF THE LATE
     MAJOR W. S. R. HODSON, B. A.
     TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE;
     FIRST BENGAL EUROPEAN FUSILEERS, COMMANDANT OF HODSON'S HORSE.

     INCLUDING

     A PERSONAL NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF DELHI
     AND CAPTURE OF THE KING AND PRINCES.

     EDITED BY HIS BROTHER,
     THE REV. GEORGE H. HODSON, M. A.
     SENIOR FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

     FROM THE THIRD AND ENLARGED ENGLISH EDITION.

     BOSTON:
     TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

     M DCCC LX.




     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




[The following paper, by the author of "Tom Brown's School Days at
Rugby," appeared in "Fraser's Magazine:"--]


The heart of England has not, within the memory of living men, been so
deeply moved as by the Indian rebellion of 1857. It was a time of real
agony,--the waiting, week after week, for those scanty despatches,
which, when they came, and lay before us in the morning papers, with
huge capitals at the top of the column, we scarcely dared take up, we
could not read without a strong effort of the will. What it must have
been to those of us whose sisters, brothers, sons, were then in the
Northwest Provinces, they alone can tell; but of the rest we do
believe there was scarce a man who did not every now and then feel a
cold sinking of heart, a sense of shame at his inability to help, a
longing to make some sacrifice of money, ease, or what not, whereby to
lift, if it might be, a portion of the dead weight from off his own
soul. By degrees came the light. As the trial had been, so had been
the strength. The white squall was past; and though that great and
terrible deluge still heaved and tossed, we began to catch sight of
one and another brave ship riding it out. Our pulses beat quick and
our eyes dimmed as we heard and read how the little band of our
kindred had turned to bay, in tale after tale of heroic daring and
self-sacrificing and saintly endurance and martyrdom. The traces here
and there of weakness and indecision only brought out more clearly the
soundness and strength of the race which was on its trial; and from
amongst the thousands who were nobly doing their duty, one man after
another stood out and drew to himself the praise, the gratitude, and
the love of the whole nation. In all her long and stern history,
England can point to no nobler sons than these, the heroes of India in
1857. Thank God, many of them are left to us; but the contest was for
the life itself, the full price had to be paid, and one after another
the heroes paid it. Some fell, full of years and honors, whom the
mutiny found with names already famous; others in their glorious
mid-day strength; others fresh from England, in the first daring years
of early youth; of all ranks and professions,--generals, governors,
cadets, missionaries, civilians, private soldiers; but each heard the
call and obeyed it faithfully, loving not his own life; and we believe
that even in this hurrying, bewildering, forgetful age, England and
Englishmen will not let the name of one of them die.

At any rate, there is little chance that the subject of this paper
will be forgotten by his countrymen, for not only has he carved out
with his sword a name for himself which knows few equals even in
Indian story, but he has left materials which have enabled his brother
to put together one of the best biographies in our language.

_Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India_ is the history of the
career of Hodson of Hodson's Horse, the captor of the King of Delhi,
compiled from private letters written to different members of his
family.

To the book itself, as a literary work, high praise may be awarded.
There are four pages only which we could wish omitted; we mean those
(from p. 432 to p. 436) which contain the extracts from newspapers.
Able leading article writers and special correspondents, who as soon
as the firing is over, bustle up to battle-fields where their
country's noblest are dying, and sit down to catch the tale of every
_claqueur_, and spin the whole into thrilling periods, doubtless have
their use, and their productions are highly valued,--or, at any rate,
are highly paid for,--by the British public. The extracts in question
are favorable specimens, on the whole, of such commodities. But Hodson
has no need of them, and they jar on one's soul at the end of such a
book. With this exception, the book is a model of its kind. There is
not a word too much of the letters; in fact, we long for more of them,
while confessing that no additional number could bring the man or his
career more livingly before us; and the editor has, with rare tact,
given us just what was needed of supplementary narrative, and no more,
and has shown himself a high-minded gentleman and Christian by his
forbearance in suppressing the names of the men who enviously and
wickedly persecuted his brother. In a charming little preface he
compares that brother to Fernando Perez, the hero of the later Spanish
ballads, and then seems to doubt whether affection may not have
biassed his judgment. We think we may reassure him on this point. The
career of the Indian Captain of Irregulars may fairly challenge
comparison with that of Fernando Perez or any other hero of romance,
and we may well apply to the Englishman, lying in the death chamber at
Lucknow, the poet's touching farewell to the peerless knight
Durandarte, stretched on the bloody sward at Roncesvalles,--

     "Kind in manners, fair in favor,
       Mild in temper, fierce in fight;
     Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
       Never shall behold the light."

But it is time for us to turn from the book to the man, and we think
our readers will thank us for giving them the best picture which our
space will allow of him and his work, as nearly as may be in his own
words; only begging them to bear in mind that these letters were
written in the strictest confidence to his nearest relations, and that
so far from wishing to make his own deeds known during his life, he
resolutely refused to allow his letters to be made public.

William Stephen Raikes Hodson, third son of the Archdeacon of
Stafford, was born in March, 1821, and went, when fourteen years old,
to Rugby, where he stayed for more than four years, two of which were
spent in the sixth form under Arnold. At school he was a bright,
pleasant boy, fond of fun, and with abilities decidedly above the
average, but of no very marked distinction, e